Add genre analysis document (#117)
Leafwing-Studios/Emergence: design/src/genre-analysis.md

# Genre Analysis: Factory Builders

## Defining Games

- Factorio
  - colonize an alien planet and launch a rocket
- Satisfactory
  - open world first person factory building
- Shapez.io
  - abstract factory puzzles
- Dyson Sphere Program
  - gather resources from an entire solar system

## Defining characteristics

> - automated resource extraction

Author: Great questions! I'll try and chew on that.

> I wonder because of the comparison to idlers later, where the automation in general isn't player designed, right?

Precisely: games like Forager and Stardew Valley and Cookie Clicker don't have intricate automation pipelines that offer an opportunity for creativity.

- automation resource refinement
- micro-optimizations
- gated technology progression

## Adjacent Genres

- Base and city builders
  - Build out a complex and delightful area, but with no / little automation
- Zachlike puzzles
  - Micro-optimization as an entire game
- Colony sims
  - Balance complex systems, but with a focus on the needs of your workers, not scaling production
- Idle games
  - Automate everything, but without the complex chains
- Train simulators

>   - Focusing almost entirely on logistic networks powered by trains

Reviewer: Are there strong examples of logistics network games that are not train games?

Author: Hmm! Arguably EVE Online? But that's at a more meta level.

> ## Blended Genre Games

Author: Yes, all factory builder + named genre.

- Mindustry (tower defense)
- Hydroneer | Astroneeer | Atrio (exploration)
- Automachef (Zachlike + cooking game)
- Infinifactory (Zachlike)
- Timberborn (city builder)

## Progression Loop

- explore
- find resource patch
- exploit resource
- refine resource
- build into science
- unlock new technology
- optimize base with new technology
- explore to find new resource type to exploit

## Sources of Challenge

> - player-driven optimization

Reviewer: What motivates the player to iteratively optimize and automate stuff? What makes that rewarding? Put differently: when does it become boring? When do players of the Defining Games tend to get bored?

Is there a Spike/Johnny/Timmy thing going on here? Are there useful player archetypes for factory builder game design?

Author: These are great questions!

> Is there a Spike/Johnny/Timmy thing going on here

I'd really like to explore this further in a separate doc.

>  When do players of the Defining Games tend to get bored?

I'm going to think about this and add a section.

- resource refinement puzzles
- logistics layout
- (optional) combat disrupting operations

> - (optional) temporal variation creating unstable

Reviewer 2: creating unstable what exactly?

Author: ```suggestion
- (optional) temporal variation creating instability in resource supply or demand
```

## Design Tensions

- complexity vs meaningful richness
- helpful innovations vs trivializing the game

> - disruption forces interesting changes vs frustration and sadness to see your stuff get wrecked

Reviewer 2: I think the climate change feature of [Sid Meyer's Civilization 6](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZ8XRJNitCE) manages this well.

- long play time vs tedious waiting around
- player fantasy of being in the game vs annoyance of inventory space and walking times

> - giant automated bases vs computational limits

Reviewer: On this point: do you know what kind of FPS the games listed in Defining Games end up managing in the long-term?

Author: People play them all the way down to like 1 FPS. Much much harder if there are realtime elements to respond to though.

And you need good frame pacing.

Reviewer 3: Notably, in Factorio players always talk about two different concepts: Frames per second (FPS) and updates per second (UPS).
Then for large factories they try to optimize the UPS.

According to this random forum comment, the RAM latency seems to be a bottleneck for Factorio, which I didn't expect.
<https://forums.factorio.com/viewtopic.php?p=226062#p226062>

> ## Standard Mechanics

Reviewer: A mechanic that I think is missing: *storage*. Dealing with storage. Closely related to trains/transportation. Games do fairly different things here.

> ## Standard Mechanics

Reviewer 3: Maybe here it would be useful to first name the abstract concept and then the concrete example?

For example chests would be a concrete example of storage and conveyer belts and trains are for transportation of goods

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if that counts as a "mechanic", but I think one important and common concept are spacial constraints that the player needs to work around.

Some are environmental (e.g. you can't place machines in water or on cliffs in Factorio) and some are player controlled (e.g. Zerg can only place structures on Creep in StarCraft or machines need to be next to powerpoles in Factorio)

Author: > first name the abstract concept and then the concrete example

Agreed, I think that's wise.

Author: > one important and common concept are spacial constraints that the player needs to work around.

Good suggestion!

- technology

>   - process and spend resources to unlock new options

Reviewer 2: Will we also have a resource knowledge tree? Something where the hive mind can't work a resource until a new tech is found so the colony avoids interacting with the resource until they can build something to help.

Author: Yeah, I expect that we'll want this in some way.

- blueprints + copy-paste
- assembling machines
  - select a recipe for what you want to make
  - often specialized variants
- resource extraction
  - usually but not always spatially limited
  - often but not always non-renewable
- raw materials, intermediates and end products

> - electricity

Reviewer: I wonder what the electrification analog for Emergence is.

Reviewer 2: I vote finding iron rich soil and iron fixing microbes that can be used to create things like wires and pass currents on them.

Author: I actually think that this is water distribution!

- conveyer belts
  - moves items from place to place
- inserters
  - loads items to and from assembling machines and chests
- chests
  - stores goods

> - (optional) bots

Reviewer 2: having synthetic worker ants your colony produces would be really neat

Author: I think in this case, we're actually shifting to a bots-first approach! And then leaving belt-likes for later and more expensive tech.

>   - takes goods from source to destination in a smarter but more expensive way

Author: ```suggestion
  - takes goods from source to destination in less linear but more expensive way
```

- (optional) trains

>   - moves huge amounts of goods at once, but with expensive infrastructure and large batches

Reviewer 2: are we also planning on adding some type of trading mechanic to allow the colony to exchange resources with nearby species or colonies?

Author: Unsure! Definitely a question for later.

## Common Problems

- mediocre combat
  - poorly integrated
  - frustrating
  - snowbally
  - thematically incoherent
  - difficult to balance
- poorly managed complexity in UX

> - poor tutorialization

Reviewer: Zachlikes being a relevant exception in the adjacent genre.

Author: Yep!

- bland, unoriginal aesthetics
- unoriginal mechanisms
- extreme reliance on external guides
- weak environmental variability
- copy-paste of optimized designs
- treadmill-style tech progression
- terrain modification that makes the world less interesting

> 

Reviewer: Can we have a section on recommended watching/reading? Good resources that we should be aware of? One good one:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gt4-tBFIcsI

Another one (but possibly doesn't fit, I pinned it in the #game-design channel on our Discord though): 

https://store.steampowered.com/app/1062090/Timberborn/

Author: Yeah, feel free to add it here! This is in git for a reason :3

## Expected Business Model

- early access
- sandbox
- live service development

> - (optional) modding

Reviewer 2: I second this!

> - (optional) modding

Author: Agreed!
